# Glossary

**Appetite**
The amount of time we want to spend on a project, as opposed to an estimate.

**Baseline**
What customers are doing without the thing we’re currently building.

**Bet**
The decision to commit a team to a project for one cycle with no interruptions and an expectation to finish.

**Betting table**
A meeting during cool-down when stakeholders decide which pitches to bet on in the next cycle.

**Big batch**
One project that occupies a team for a whole cycle and ships at the end.

**Breadboard**
A UI concept that defines affordances and their connections without visual styling.

**Circuit breaker**
A risk management technique: Cancel projects that don’t ship in one cycle by default instead of extending them by default.

**Cleanup mode**
The last phase of building a new product, where we don’t shape or bet on any particular projects but instead allocate unstructured time to fix whatever is needed before launch.

**Cool-down**
A two-week break between cycles to do ad-hoc tasks, fix bugs, and hold a betting table.

**Cycle**
A six week period of time where teams work uninterruptedly on shaped projects.

**De-risk**
Improve the odds of shipping within one cycle by shaping and removing rabbit holes.

**Discovered tasks**
Tasks the team discovers they need to do after they start getting involved in the real work.

**Downhill**
The phase of a task, scope or project where all unknowns are solved and only execution is left.

**Fat marker sketch**
A sketch of a UI concept at very low fidelity drawn with a thick line.

**Hill chart**
A diagram showing the status of work on a spectrum from unknown to known to done.

**Iceberg**
A scope of work where the back-end work is much more complex than the UI or vice versa.

**Imagined tasks**
Work the teams decide they need to do after just thinking about the project. See discovered tasks.

**Layer cake**
A scope of work you can estimate by looking at the surface area of the UI.

**Level of abstraction**
The amount of detail we leave in or out when describing a problem or solution.

**Must-haves**
Tasks that must be completed for a scope to be considered done.

**Nice-to-haves**
Task left for the end of the cycle. If there isn’t time to do them, they get cut. Marked with a '~' at the beginning.

**Pitch**
A document that presents a shaped project idea for consideration at the betting table.

**Production mode**
A phase of building a new product where the core architecture is settled and we apply the standard Shape Up process.

**Rabbit hole**
Part of a project that is too unknown, complex, or open-ended to bet on.

**R&D mode**
A phase of building a new product where a senior team spikes the core features to define the core architecture.

**Raw ideas**
Requests or feature ideas that are expressed in words and haven’t been shaped.

**Scopes**
Parts of a project that can be built, integrated, and finished independently of the rest of the project.

**Scope hammering**
Forcefully questioning a design, implementation, or use case to cut scope and finish inside the fixed time box.

**Shape**
Make an abstract project idea more concrete by defining key elements of the solution before betting on it.

**Six weeks**
The length of our cycles. Six weeks is long enough to finish something meaningful and short enough to feel the deadline from the beginning.

**Small batch**
A set of 1-2 week projects that a single team ships by the end of a six week cycle.

**Time horizon**
The longest period of time where we can feel a deadline pushing on us from the beginning. Six weeks.

**Uphill**
The phase of a task, scope or project where there are still unkowns or unsolved problems. See downhill.
